\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename climacs-user
@settitle Climacs User Manual
@c %**end of header

@copying
The Climacs User manual

Copyright @copyright{} 2005 Robert Strandh.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title Climacs User Manual
@sp 2
@author Robert Strandh

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@contents

@macro climacs{}
Climacs
@end macro

@macro cl{}
Common Lisp
@end macro

@node Top
@top

@menu
* Introduction::
* Conventions::
* Concepts::
* Basic editing commands::
* Different editing modes::
* Kill ring::
* Advanced editing commands::
* Getting help::
* Proposal for new buffer/pane relations::
* Key Index::
* Concept Index::
@end menu


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@climacs{} is a text editor in the Emacs family.  However, @climacs{}
differs from Emacs in various ways.  

For one thing, @climacs{} is written in Common Lisp rather than Emacs
Lisp.  Common Lisp is a much more complete language than Emacs Lisp
with essential features such as packages, classes, etc.

Moreover, @climacs{} uses the Common-Lisp Interface Manager (CLIM) as its
substrate for managing everything that has to do with user
interaction, including event handling, text rendering, and
multi-windowing (called panes in CLIM terminology). 

Also, since @climacs{} uses CLIM, there is no need for @climacs{} itself to
serve as the basis for other applications such as news readers, mail
readers, directory editors, web browsers, etc. the way it is done with
Emacs.  Instead, such applications are better written as stand-alone
CLIM applications that can then communicate with @climacs{} using CLIM
and Common Lisp as the common substrate. 

The main purpose of @climacs{} is not to replace Emacs.  Instead, it is
primarily intended as a text editor for Common Lisp developers.
Notice that this is not the same as a text editor for Common Lisp
@emph{development}, since Common Lisp developers might need other
features such as editing HTML or spell checking, etc., not directly
related to Common Lisp development. 

@node Conventions
@chapter Conventions

Many @climacs{} commands are invoked by typing a sequence of
keystrokes.  A complete sequence of keystrokes invokes a
@climacs{} @emph{command} which has a @emph{name}.  Sometimes it is
useful to know that name, even though the command is usually invoked
by typing the key sequence.  For that reason, in this manual we often
give the corresponding command name together with the key sequence to
invoke it. 

@node Concepts
@chapter Concepts

In order to use @climacs{} effectively, you need to know some concepts
that are used by it, and referred to in this manual.

@menu
* Buffer::
* Window and pane::
* Mark and point::
* Key sequence::
@end menu

@node Buffer
@section Buffer

A @climacs{} @emph{buffer}
@cindex buffer
is an editable sequence of arbitrary @cl{} objects.  If the buffer
contains text, most of those objects will be @emph{Unicode
characters}.
@cindex character
@cindex Unicode

@node Window and pane
@section Window and pane

A @climacs{} buffer may or may not be on display.  If it is, it is on
display in a @emph{pane} 
@cindex pane
or a @emph{window}.
@cindex window

@node Mark and point
@section Mark and point

Positions into a @climacs{} buffer are determined by @emph{marks}
@cindex mark
which can be either @emph{left sticky},
@cindex left sticky
meaning that if an object is inserted where such a mark is, it ends up
@emph{to the left} of the newly inserted object, or @emph{right
sticky},
@cindex right sticky
meaning that if an object is inserted where such a mark is, it ends up
@emph{to the right} of the newly inserted object.

A distinguished mark that is associated with each @climacs{} pane is
called the @emph{point}.
@cindex point
There is a point associated with each window.  Each of several windows
that display the same buffer has its own point.  In addition, a buffer
that is not on display has a point that is taken over by the first
window that displays the buffer.  Points are right-sticky marks, even
when a language such as Arabic is edited, simply because by
convention, the @climacs{} buffer is considered as being organized
from left to right.  It is a question of @emph{rendering} as to whether
the objects in the buffer are actually displayed from left to right,
from right to left, or in any other appropriate order. 

@node Key sequence
@section Key sequence

Typically, @climacs{} is operated by @emph{key sequences}
@cindex key sequence
issued by the user.  A key sequence is a sequence of key strokes,
where a key stroke can be a simple character such as @kbd{f} or
@kbd{&}, or a key with one or more @emph{modifiers}
@cindex modifier
such as @key{Control}, @key{Shift}, @key{Meta}, etc.

Some key sequences result in the execution of a @climacs{}
@emph{command}.
@cindex command
Such a key sequence is called a @emph{complete key sequence}
@cindex complete key sequence
or an @emph{order}.
@cindex order

@node Basic editing commands
@chapter Basic editing commands

The basic editing commands of @climacs{} are identical or at least
similar to the corresponding Emacs commands.  This is deliberate.  We
do not believe in introducing gratuitous differences where such
differences have little or no importance.  A typical Emacs user
should therefore feel quite comfortable with the basic editing
commands of @climacs{}.

@menu
* Entering and exiting Climacs::
* Numeric arguments::
* Entering and deleting text::
* Moving around::
* Extended commands::
* Editing the contents of a file::
@end menu

@node Entering and exiting Climacs
@section Entering and exiting Climacs

The typical way of entering @climacs{} is to type a @cl{}
@emph{expression} at the prompt of a @cl{} @emph{listener} such as:

@lisp
CL-USER> (climacs-gui:climacs)
@end lisp

You exit from @climacs{} by typing @kbd{C-x C-c} (@command{Quit}).
@kindex C-x C-c
If you have buffers
associated with files that have not been saved to their respective
files, @climacs{} will ask whether you would like those buffers
saved.  In addition, if you answer no to any of those questions, you
will be asked to confirm that you want to quit @climacs{} anyway.  The
reason for this pestering on the part of @climacs{} is that currently
when you quit @climacs{}, the buffer contents are lost.

@node Numeric arguments
@section Numeric arguments

Many @climacs{} commands allow the use of a @emph{numeric argument}.
@cindex numeric argument
A numeric argument is used as a prefix to a @climacs{} command, and
modifies the behavior of that command in some useful way which varies
from command to command.

Typically, a numeric argument prefix makes the command repeat its
action a number of times indicated by the numeric argument prefix.
For instance, the command @command{Delete Object}, usually associated
with the order @kbd{C-d}, normally deletes a single object from the
buffer.  However, if given a numeric argument, it deletes that many
objects. 

Other commands modify their behavior according to whether a numeric
argument has been given, but do not take into account the specific
numeric value indicated.  For instance, the command @command{Delete
Horizontal Space}, when given no numeric argument, deletes whitespace
both before and after point.  With a numeric argument, it deletes only
whitespace @emph{before} point.

Yet other commands may both modify what they do and repeat according
to the numeric value of the argument.  For instance, the command
@command{Kill Line}, when given no numeric argument, kills to the end
of the line if point is not already at the end of the line, but does
not kill the newline character at the end of the line and kills the
newline character if point is at the end of a line.  However, if given
a numeric argument, @command{Kill Line} kills that many lines.

There are two ways of giving a numeric argument to a @climacs{}
command.  One way is to first type @kbd{C-u}, 
@kindex C-u
then a sequence of
decimal digits, and finally the order that invokes the command.  For
instance, to delete the next 15 objects after point, you could type
@kbd{C-u 1 5 C-d}.  The other way is to hold down the @key{Meta} key
(usually the one marked @key{Alt}) while typing the decimal digits, as
in @kbd{M-1 M-5 C-d}.

Some commands accept negative numeric arguments.  In that case, start
the sequence with the minus sign as in @kbd{C-u - 1 5 C-d}, which in
this case will delete buffer objects @emph{before} the point rather
than after. 

@node Entering and deleting text
@section Entering and deleting text

@menu
* Entering text::
* Deleting by objects::
* Deleting by words::
* Deleting by lines::
@end menu

@node Entering text
@subsection Entering text

In contrast to other text editors such as VI, @climacs{} does not have
a specific @emph{insert mode}.  Instead, @climacs{} is always in
insert mode, in that characters that are typed on the keyboard
immediately get inserted at the @emph{point}.

@node Deleting by objects
@subsection Deleting by objects

To erase objects that have been inserted, you can use the
@key{Backspace} (@command{Backward Delete Object}
key, which deletes the object immediately to the left of the point.
To delete an object @emph{to the right} of the point, use the
@kbd{C-d} 
@kindex C-d
(@command{Delete Object}) order.  When used with a numeric
argument, these commands delete that many objects. 

@node Deleting by words
@subsection Deleting by words

It is also possible to delete larger chunks of buffer contents.  The
order @kbd{M-d} 
@kindex M-d
(@command{Kill Word}) is used to delete the @emph{word}
@cindex word
@emph{following} point.  If point is not at the beginning of a word,
then the part of the word that follows point is deleted.  The order
@kbd{M-@key{Backspace}} 
@kindex M-@key{Backspace}
(@command{Backward Kill Word}) is used to
delete the word @emph{preceding} point.  If point is not at the end of
a word, then the part of the word that precedes point is deleted.
When used with a numeric argument, these commands delete that many
words.  Since these command names contain the word @emph{kill}, they
use the kill-ring (@pxref{kill-ring}).

@node Deleting by lines
@subsection Deleting by lines

@climacs{} allows you to delete buffer objects one or more lines at a
time.  The order @kbd{C-k}
@kindex C-k
(@command{Kill Line}) lets you do this.  When point is @emph{not} at
the end of a line, then this command kills the buffer contents from
point up to, but not including the following newline object.  When
instead point @emph{is} at the end of a line, only the following
newline object is removed. 

When used with a numeric argument, this command is not simply repeated
that many times.  Instead, the number of lines indicated by the
numeric argument are removed.  

Because this command name contains the word @emph{kill} it saves the
deleted objects on the @emph{kill ring} (@pxref{kill-ring}).

@node Moving around
@section Moving around

@menu
* Moving by objects::
* Moving by words::
* Moving by lines::
@end menu

@node Moving by objects
@subsection Moving by objects

@climacs{} allows you to move around in the buffer in various ways. 
The most frequent way of moving around is by one buffer position at a
time.  

The order @kbd{C-f}
@kindex C-f
(@command{Forward Object}) allows you to
advance the position of point by one position.  If given a numeric
argument, it advances by that many positions.  The @command{Forward
Object} command is also associated with the @emph{right-arrow key}. 

The order @kbd{C-b} 
@kindex C-b
(@command{Backward Object}) allows you to move the
position of point backward by one position.  If given a numeric
argument, it moves back by that many positions.  The @command{Backward
Object} command is also associated with the @emph{left-arrow key}.

@node Moving by words
@subsection Moving by words

@climacs{} will allow you to move around by larger units than
objects.

The order @kbd{M-f}
@kindex M-f
(@command{Forward Word}) lets you move forward over the @emph{word}
@cindex word
following point. With a numeric argument, this command moves point
forward that many words. 

The order @kbd{M-b}
@kindex M-b
(@command{Backward Word}) lets you move backward over the @emph{word}
@cindex word
preceding point. With a numeric argument, this command moves point
backward that many words. 

Notice the analogy between the commands for moving by objects
(@kbd{C-f}, @kbd{C-b}) and those for moving by words (@kbd{M-f},
@kbd{M-b}). 

@node Moving by lines
@subsection Moving by lines

@climacs{} has commands to move by one or several @emph{lines} at a
time.  

The order @kbd{C-p}
@kindex C-p
(@command{Previous Line}) allows you to
move point @emph{up} to the previous line.  If given a numeric
argument, it moves up by that many lines.  The command
@command{Previous Line} is also associated with the @emph{up-arrow
key}.  

The order @kbd{C-n}
@kindex C-n
(@command{Next Line}) allows you to
move point @emph{down} to the next line.  If given a numeric
argument, it moves down by that many lines.  The command
@command{Next Line} is also associated with the @emph{down-arrow
key}.  

When you move by lines, @climacs{} tries to be smart about which
@emph{column} point ends up in, in the following way: when a sequence
of commands that move by lines is given, the initial column of point
is remembered (this is called the @emph{goal column}).  @climacs{}
then tries to position point in that column of the target line.  If
the target line has fewer than that many columns, point is positioned
at the end of the target line.  The goal column is discarded when the
sequence of commands is interrupted by some unrelated command. 

@node Extended commands
@section Extended commands

In order to make editing as efficient as possible, many @climacs{}
commands can be invoked by key sequences.  It is, however, possible to
invoke most @climacs{} commands by using the order @kbd{M-x} which
invokes the command @command{Extended Command} which lets you type the
@emph{name} of the command in the minibuffer at the prompt.
In general, you do not have to type the full name of the command,
because @climacs{} uses CLIM's completion mechanism so that you can
complete the name by typing some prefix and then use the @key{TAB} key
to complete. 

Some @climacs{} commands @emph{must} be invoked through the use of
@command{Extended Command}.  The reason for this is that key sequences
are a precious resource, and for rarely-used commands, it is better
not to waste a key sequence. 

@node Editing the contents of a file
@section Editing the contents of a file

Transfering the contents of a text file into a @climacs{} buffer is
referred to as @emph{finding} the file.
@cindex finding a file

There are two ways of transfering the contents of a buffer to a file.
One is to @emph{save} the buffer, which means to transfer the contents
to the file that is already associated with the buffer.  The other is
to @emph{write} the buffer, which means to transfer the contents to a
different file than that associated with the buffer, or to write the
contents of a buffer that has no associated file to some file.

@menu 
* Finding a file::	Moving text from a file to a @climacs{} buffer
* Saving a buffer::	Moving text from a buffer to the associated file
* Writing a buffer::	Moving text from a buffer to a different file  
@end menu

@node Finding a file
@subsection Finding a file

To find a file, use the order @kbd{C-x C-f}
@kindex C-x C-f
(@command{Find File}).

@climacs{} will prompt for the name of a file.  For typing the file
name, you can use @emph{completion} (using the @key{TAB} key), or you
can use the right mouse button to get a list of all the files that
match the prefix you typed.

The result of finding a file is that a @emph{buffer} will be created
that has the name of the file, and the file will be associated with
that buffer when the content is saved.

@node Saving a buffer
@subsection Saving a buffer

To save a buffer, use the order @kbd{C-x C-s}
@kindex C-x C-s
(@command{Save Buffer}).
The contents of the buffer will be transfered to the file associated
with the buffer if there is one.  If the buffer has no file name
associated with it, then this command behaves just like @command{Write
Buffer} (@pxref{write-buffer}).

@node Writing a buffer
@subsection Writing a buffer
@anchor{write-buffer}

To write a buffer to a file, use the order @kbd{C-x C-w}
@kindex C-x C-w
(@command{Write Buffer}).  @climacs{} will prompt for the name of a
file to save the buffer contents in.  Completion (by using the
@key{TAB} key, or by using the right mouse button) can be used if the
name is that of an existing file.

@node Different editing modes
@chapter Different editing modes

@menu
* Overwrite mode::
@end menu

@node Overwrite mode
@section Overwrite mode

Normally, typing ordinary characters to @climacs{} results in these
characters being @emph{inserted} at point.  Sometimes, however, it is
useful to treat a line of objects as being of @emph{fixed length}, and
have @climacs{} @emph{replace} objects as new ones are being typed.  

This is exactly the purpose of @climacs{} @emph{overwrite mode}.  This
mode alters the insert commands so that the object after point is
first deleted. 

You can toggle between the normal mode of operation and overwrite mode
by using the @key{Insert} 
@kindex @key{Insert}
(@command{Toggle Overwrite Mode}) key.  

@node Kill ring
@chapter Kill ring
@anchor{kill-ring}

Many @climacs{} commands that remove objects from a buffer save these
objects on a global @emph{kill ring}.
@cindex kill ring

@node Advanced editing commands
@chapter Advanced editing commands

@menu 
* Keyboard macros::
* Searching and replacing::
@end menu

@node Keyboard macros
@section Keyboard macros

Sometimes, it is useful to be able to repeat a sequence of keystrokes
several times.  @climacs{} allows you to do this through a feature
called @emph{keyboard macros}.
@cindex keyboard macro
@climacs{} does this by @emph{recording} whatever the user types on
the keyboard, and then making it possibly to @emph{replay} the
recorded sequence.

To start recording a sequence of keystrokes, use the order @kbd{C-x (}
@kindex C-x (
(@command{Start Kbd Macro}).  You will see the word @samp{Def}
appearing on the mode line, indicating that a keyboard macro is being
defined.  As long as recording is in effect, every keystroke will be
saved for later use.  

To stop recording a sequence of keystrokes, use the order @kbd{C-x )}
@kindex C-x )
(@command{End Kbd Macro}).  The word @samp{Def} will disappear from
the mode line, indicating that keystrokes are no longer being
recorded. 

To replay a previously recorded sequence of keystrokes, use the order
@kbd{C-x e}
@kindex C-x e
(@command{Call Last Kbd Macro}).  When used with a numeric argument,
this command will repeat the sequence of keystrokes that many times. 

@node Searching and replacing
@section Searching and replacing

Climacs has a number of useful searching and replacing commands. The
replacing commands come in two flavors - querying commands and
non-querying commands. The former will unconditionally replace all
matches, while the latter will query before each replacement. Note that
the searching and replacing commands only affect the buffer contents
after point.

@menu
* Simple search::
* Incremental search::
* The isearch command loop::
* Replacing single strings::
* Replacing multiple different strings::
* The query-replace command loop::
@end menu

@node Simple search
@subsection Simple search

The simplest search command is @command{String Search}. It prompts for a
string and moves point to after the next occurrence of the
string. @command{Reverse String Search} is similar, but searches
backwards from point, and puts point before the first occurrence of the
string.

The commands @command{Word Search} and @command{Reverse Word Search} are
very similar to @command{String Search} and @command{Reverse String
Search}, but only finds matches that are whole words.

The commands @command{Regex Search Forward} and @command{Regex Search
Backward} are similar to @command{String Search} and @command{Reverse
Word Search}, but do not search for plain strings. Instead, they ask the
user to enter a regular expression and attempts to find a match in the
buffer.

You can use the command @command{How Many} to count the number of
matches in the buffer for a given regular expression. When invoked, the
command will ask for a regular expression, and then proceed to search
through the buffer, counting each match for the regular expression, and
finally print the number of matches to the minibuffer.

@node Incremental search
@subsection Incremental search

Incremental search, or @emph{isearch} in common speech, is different
from string search, in that point is moved to matches in the buffer,
while the search string is being entered, thus, the user receives
immediate feedback while entering the search string. Incremental search
is controlled through a command loop. @xref{The isearch command loop}.

Incremental search can be entered via two orders, @kbd{C-s}
@kindex C-s
(@command{Isearch Forward}) and  @kbd{C-r}
@kindex C-r
(@command{Isearch Backward}). These commands starts a command loop that
searches forwards and backwards by default, respectively. Note that the
search direction can be changed from inside the command loop, no matter
which of these commands were used to start it.

@node The isearch command loop
@subsection The isearch command loop

The isearch command loop consists of the user typing in characters for
the search string, and Climacs moving point ahead to the most immediate
instance of the provided string, while the user is typing. Apart from
simply entering text, the user can manipulate the command loop by
entering the following orders:

@table @kbd
@item C-s
Move to next match for current search string and set the search
direction to forward.
@item C-r
Move to previous match for current search string and set the search
direction to backward.
@item C-j
Append a ``newline'' character to the current search string.
@item C-w
Append the word at point to the current search string.
@item C-y 
Append the line at point to the current search string.
@item M-y
Append the head of the kill ring to the search string.
@item @key{Backspace}
Delete the last element of the search string. This is not the same as
deleting the last character - for example, if the word at point has been
appended to the search string via @kbd{C-w}, this order will delete the
entire word, not just the last character of the word.
@item @key{Newline}
Exit the isearch command loop.
@end table

@node Replacing single strings
@subsection Replacing single strings

The basic string-replacement command can be accessed through the order
@kbd{C-x e}
@kindex C-x e
(@command{Replace String}). This command will prompt for two strings,
and replace all instances of the first string following point in the
current buffer, with the second string. This command is not querying,
and will thus not prompt before each replacement, so if you desire this
behavior, use the order @kbd{M-%}
@kindex M-%
(@command{Query Replace}) instead. @xref{The query-replace command loop}.

@node Replacing multiple different strings
@subsection Replacing multiple different strings

It is often desirable to be able to replace multiple, different strings
with one command - for instance, you might want to replace all
occurrences of ``foo'' with ``bar'' and all occurrences of ``bar'' with
``baz'', without having the replacements affect each other. For this,
Climacs provides the command @command{Multiple Query Replace}, which
will prompt for pairs of strings, replacing the first with the second.
Entering an empty search string stops the prompting and starts the
query-replace command loop. It is also possible to use @command{Multiple
Query Replace From Buffer}, which will read the string pairs from a
buffer provided by the user.

If you wish to exchange two strings for one another, use the command
@command{Query Exchange}, which will prompt for two strings, and replace
them for each other in the current buffer.

@node The query-replace command loop
@subsection The query-replace command loop

When invoking one of the querying replace commands, you will enter a
command loop with specialized commands for manipulating the replacement
process.

The command loop will loop across the buffer, and for each match, the
command loop will read an order from the user. The following orders and
their corresponding commands are available:

@table @kbd
@item y, @key{Space}
Replace the current match with the provided string, go to next
match.
@item n, @key{Rubout}, @key{Backspace}
Do not replace the current match, go to next match.
@item q, @key{Newline}
Quit the command loop, preserving all replacements already made.
@item .
Replace the current match with the provided string and quit the
command loop.
@item !
Replace all matches with the provided replacement strings.
@end table

@node Getting help
@chapter Getting help

In addition to this manual, @climacs{} contains an online help
facility.  There are several different topics that you can get help
with.  Most of these topics are obtained by some order using the
@kbd{C-h}
@kindex C-h
prefix key.  The key following @kbd{C-h} determines what kind of help
information is displayed. 

@menu 
* Help with a command::
* Help with a key binding::
* Help with a particular key sequence::
* Help finding a command::
* Help finding an order for a command::
@end menu

@node Help with a command
@section Help with a command

To get documentation about a particular command, use the order @kbd{C-h
f} 
@kindex C-h f
(@command{Describe Command}). You will be prompted for
the name of a command, and if you provide a valid command name, a pane
containing information about which function the command calls, which
gestures the command can be invoked through, as well as a description of
the command, will be displayed.

@node Help with a key binding
@section Help with a key binding

To obtain a list of all orders and the associated commands that are
valid in a particular context, use the order @kbd{C-h b}
@kindex C-h b
(@command{Describe Bindings}).  A table with each command name and
associated order (if any) is displayed in a new window. 

@node Help with a particular key sequence
@section Help with a particular key sequence

To obtain a description of what some putative order will do, use the
order @kbd{C-h c}p
@kindex C-h c
(@command{Describe Key Briefly}).  You will be prompted for a key
sequence.  If the key sequence you type is bound to a command, the
command name will be displayed in the minibuffer.  Otherwise, a message
indicating that the key is not bound to a command will be displayed.

For more detailed information, use the order @kbd{C-h c} 
@kindex C-h k
(@command{Describe Key}). You will be prompted for a key sequence, and
if the key sequence you provide is bound to a command, documentation for
that command, as well as any arguments the given key binding calls the
command with, will be shown.

@node Help finding a command
@section Help findind a command

If you do not know which commands are applicable to a given situation,
you can use the order @kbd{C-h a}
@kindex C-h a
(@command{Apropos Command}) to perform a keyword-based search for
commands. You will be prompted for a keyword, after which Climacs will
search through the available commands for commands that are connected to
the keyword. If commands are found, they will be displayed in a pane
along with the gestures you can use to invoke them. You can also click
on the names of the commands to get more thorough documentation.

@node Help finding an order for a command
@section Help finding an order for a command

Sometimes, you know the name of a command, and would like to find out
whether it is bound to any order, and if so, which one(s).  For that,
you can use the order @kbd{C-h w}
@kindex C-h w
(@command{Where Is}).  You will be prompted for a command name
(completion can be used as usual), and if the command name given is
bound to an order, that order will displayed in the minibuffer.
Otherwise, a message indicating that the command is not bound to any
order will be displayed. 

@node Proposal for new buffer/pane relations
@chapter Proposal for new buffer/pane relations

There is a proposal on the table to make the way @climacs{} manages
buffers and panes incompatible with that of Emacs, and in the process
thus cleaning up 30 years of baggage. 

The proposal is to no longer allow buffers without panes.  Instead, a
buffer will always be associated with at least one pane, though that
pane could be adopted or disowned to make it visible or invisible. 
The advantage of this organization is that a buffer will no longer
contain a point.  Also, panes can contain other things that buffers
such as buffer lists, debugger applications, etc.

For this to work, we need to define how the effect of certain
commands related to buffers and windows will be altered.  The proposal
is: 

C-x 2 creates an additional pane with its own point and that shares
the buffer of the current pane.  It also adopts the new pane by the
same mechanism used now (creating a vbox pane containing the two.  C-x
3 is similar except that it uses a hbox instead.

C-x 0 does not destroy the pane, but just disowns it (by replacing the
rack it is in by the pane itself).  

C-x 1 does the equivalent of C-x 0 on all other visible panes.

C-x k kills the current pane.  If that happens to be the last pane
containing a particular buffer, then the buffer is lost as well.

C-x b replaces the current pane by some arbitrary pane displaying the
buffer that has been requested (or creates a new buffer and a new pane
if the buffer requested does not exist?).

@node Key Index
@unnumbered Key Index

@printindex ky

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye
